EMERGENT
How “spiritual but not religious” goes mainstream in the age of AI.




Sean McDonald
͏
͏
͏
͏
͏

COPYRIGHT SEAN MCDONALD, 2023.
Cover art by Sean McDonald.  Includes AI generated artwork by MidJourney, which holds a license to the illustrated image. 



DEDICATION 


I love you, Courtney. 
With you, everything.
Without you
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION: Sooner or Later and Long Ago

EMERGENT
1. Worship What Is 
2. The Emergents 
3. Emergent Values
4. Emergent as a Demographic

PERSPECTIVE
5. Half-allachian 
6. The Preacher’s Son 
7.  Killing a Billion Things 
8.  Bar Huntin’ 
9. I see talking monkeys. 
10. Spiritual Autism 
11. We Are All One Thing

PEOPLE
12. Community Identity
13. Art & Magic 
14. Four Poems 
15. The Cast and Crew of The Grand Temple 

AWAKE > WOKE
16. Ethics & Curriculum 
17. From Social Impact to Spiritual Alignment
18. Henrietta, the Hexagon
19. Henrietta Sues the School 

EMERGENT MARKETS 
20. Meditation & Migration 
21. Our Kids — at 28 
22. Mary Was Hairy 
23. The Giant Clock in the Sky 
24. The Extraordinary Power of Counting Hours 
25. Time is Love 
26. The 27 Club 

STRONG EMERGENTS
27. Emergent Assets
28. The Story We Tell Ourselves 
͏30% = 99 million
Consider this:

In the United States, there is a demographic group half the size of the population of Christians—and 5x the size of all other mainstream religions combined. According to the Pew Research Center, about 64% of Americans, including children, identify as Christian. All other mainstream religions, including Jews, Muslims, Hindus, and Buddhists, add up to about 6% of the population. The remaining 30% identify as "spiritual but not religious."

These people are called “nones”, “religiously unaffiliated”, “people of nonreligious spirituality” and “spiritual but not religious”, depending on context and details among a spectrum of beliefs within the group. They are seldom defined by what they do believe. We are seldom defined by what we believe. It’s not nothing.

Only about 2% of Americans don’t believe in God or any higher power at all. In fact, a "solid majority" of Americans who self-define as “spiritual but not religious” believe in a higher power or "spiritual force." Approximately 75% of those who identify as "spiritual but not religious" pray, with more than half praying every day.

The population of the United States is about 331 million people. That’s about 99.3 million people who are spiritual but not religious. There’s almost 100 million of us. Have you heard about a book about us before?


͏


[1]
INTRODUCTION 
Sooner or Later and Long Ago 

The closest thing I own to tie-dye is camouflage. 

I think it’s important to understand that about me, given the nature of the book. I am not a guru. I am not a shaman. I’m not a priest, not a minister, nor somebody who has ever performed a wedding. I’m an entrepreneur and artist, and this book is a work of art, not futurist prediction. It’s definitely not a self-help book. 

I don’t own any sacred robes. I wear one of those silicone wedding rings. At dinner parties, I talk about local art openings, something I love to support, or good hunting spots, depending on who all’s at the party. When you read this book, I will most likely be writing code or pitching partners for a startup. 

I say all that up front because I want to somehow prove to you that I don’t actually intend to start an Emergent Church. I don’t intend to argue for legal rights for spiritual but not religious people around the country, and I don’t want my career to be dominated by discussions of spiritual but not religious people for more than the next little while. I’m already working on my next book, inventing a new political party, now that I’ve humbly finished the blueprint for a new religion. 

What I want is a community where I feel I belong, and institutions that reflect my values.

I think a lot of you do, too. 

There is message that, for me, is a signal in the noise. Something I have heard from the Universe, from God, from the Addressable Unknown—time and time again. From mountain retreats to meditative moments, through cathedral windows, and in the palaces of the mind, the message has emerged more clearly each pass. It goes like this: 

Dear Human, 

There are no “correct” answers to spiritual questions.

What is God? Is there an afterlife? Which religion is correct? You can embrace solutions to these questions all you want, but your brain’s ability to process spiritual truth is about like a bear’s ability to sit down at a computer and engineer artificial intelligence. 

You ought to focus on making the most of the opportunities before you: Loving the life you live and loving the people in your life are the ultimate acts of gratitude for the gift of consciousness. Building tools, sharing art, and especially cooking nutritious delicious things for those people is an expression of that love. Consider living in the types of small spiritual communities like humans have for most of the time, even if only some of the time. You may be happier that way.

You’re not the founder of a religion, and humans are better off without gurus in your lives, yourselves included. But you can show people how you might start a religion—talk about it. That might do some good. Don’t half-ass it. Say it like you mean it. 

You can call me God, or The Universe, the Source, the One…or whatever you like. No human concept contains me. You can address me, but you don’t know what, where, why, how—or possibly who—I am.

— The Addressable Unknown 


----
It’s not that I just randomly discern that message when I look at the stars. It’s that, when I stare at the stars and ponder, my mind goes to that message. It seems like it’s a very old message. Not based on some intuition, but based on observation.

I’m confident in saying that, hundreds of thousands of years before anybody thought of today’s mainstream religions, an early member of our species thought, “I have no idea what’s going on or how we all got here.” And probably not long after, another thought, “I’m grateful for the sun thing, as it warms my naked body.” Later, but long before recorded history it seems, someone thought “Seems like everything is interconnected.” And they were right! 

The very short version of this book is this: we still don’t know where we are or how we got here, and we would be wise to be ever-more grateful for the sun—for existence itself. We can worship what is. That’s why I’ve written this book. 

I believe it’s time “spiritual but not religious” people define ourselves by what we are, not what we’re not. We are among the largest, wealthiest, and most influential self-identifying groups to ever walk the Earth. When spiritual but not religious people evolve into a focused demographic, it may be the most valuable advertising demographic in the history of the world. 

Recognizing the mysteries of the universe while worshiping the Earth and the Sun and the Moon and the Stars—that’s the oldest spiritual practice by a long shot. Today, the practice isn’t a “religion” by the definition of the government, and the practitioners of the most ancient form of spiritual practice get no rights and privileges as such. Build a Methodist Church, and you’re tax-exempt; build a Solar Temple, and you have to pay taxes, or hire a great attorney to slowly work your way through the legal system and maybe—maybe not—get approval for a niche religion. The strain on people who want to use the legal system to build a community center that is labeled Christian is very low and the state helps them out. The strain on people who want to have a Temple for the Stars is very high because most people haven’t been doing this, and the law doesn’t cater to it. While some folks outright don’t want it to happen, many others believe first and foremost in religious freedom and will support our cause if we earnestly and compassionately express our believes and live our values. 

The purpose of this book is to whiteboard a religious infrastructure for “spiritual but not religious” people. By organizing and following the rules, we can build the community centers, summer camps, and places to worship nature with all the privileges our friends and family who participate in mainstream religions receive. Most of this is experiential benefit: having places to gather, communities, and content that expresses our values. Some of it is, brass tacks, about taxes.

Because of legal liabilities, I pledge in writing that I will not financially participate in non-profits formed under the Emergent movement, should one ever emerge. I will never draw a salary from an Emergent Temple, and I will never, ever start a non-profit to raise funds under the auspices of Emergent work. 

If the world so needs something like that to exist, surely others will do it better than I ever could. Again, I will be busy working on other books, other art projects, and building software. As you will see, those are my expression of my Emergent values. I can only hope I sometimes participate in community events where people where EMERGENT t-shirts, but I’d rather have the event without the shirt than the shirt without the event.

The lonesome Emergent. 

When I started writing this, I was the only person on Earth who identified as Emergent, so I’ve used my story to highlight the role of spirituality and the need for religion in a person’s life. As you will see, I’ve been through more than one medical crisis, and lost both my career and my identity in my 30s. Writing this book has been part of the healing process, clarifying deep in my being the differences between the world as it is today, and how I wish it would be. 

In my career in industrial agriculture, I killed at least a billion living things. Mercilessly. I focused on myself and my business above and beyond my family or anyone else. The chemicals we were producing were killing me. I crashed hard, and, fortunately, found my way to healing and to awakening. I had quickly soared in my life and career, and then fell, crashing hard, like a startup Icarus, falling apart under the heat.

In my reconstruction, I found my way to a spiritual journey. I found my way to the Dear Human message. I found my way to communities of people around the country forming together under new models of “church” and congregation. I found art and music and books—all of which I will share throughout promoting this book and the associated art project. Now I know that people like me all around the world have found their own healing and their own awakenings. The number of people who have found a new spiritual connection through psychedelics is an important not-so-quite-anymore movement in our cultural landscape, and that plays a big role in bringing people back from “nothing” spiritual systems to “something” spiritual systems. From “who cares” to “spiritual but not religious.” 
We live at the best time yet for the spiritual but not religious crowd to build the infrastructure and identity we need—we deserve—in our society. Most people haven’t been through the extremes I have, but have been through their own traumas, their own gauntlets. Many of you have found your own path to a new spiritual identity, but now, finally, we are coming together to form communities around a new way of life. It’s a loosely defined demographic—until now—but generally people want to find physical health, spiritual enlightenment, and community life. Many people find a surge in their desire for this lifestyle after an awakening, ranging from a new meditation or yoga practice to psychedelic or microdosing experiences. Whatever path you take, it leads you back to the great mystery, and, if you’re like me, leaves you humbled and grateful to be here.

I hope this book provides “wet clay” for you, my tribe. Defining a new spiritual identity has to be a collective choice, so this book won’t be right in the rearview mirror. But it’s something I can bring to you all and, from it—I hope—you can find things to work into whatever shape suits you, like a sculptor taking wet clay and slowly crafting it into the version that goes into the kiln. The ideas in this book are part fiction and part practice. I think of it as real-life magic realism, where the fictional storefront exists online. 

I’m writing this because I want to bring people together across artificial boundaries, where we’re stuck. What benefits the people I care about is to help people who are religious see spiritual but not religious people not as “nones” or giant question marks, but as people who believe the mystery continues. Seekers, not pretending they know it all—as hardened “humans know everything already” atheists believe. When the majority of us have the option to see one another as sharing a depth of spiritual identity, we can step out of the frames of partisan politics, out of the frames of abusive capitalism (or abusive communism), and into a shared space of general spiritual awareness as a key component of life in society. We can increase the overlap in the Venn diagram of our subcultures, expand the Overton window.

Ultimately, it’s hard to define a group defined by what they’re not. For this book, I’m talking about a self-selected group of people who want to participate in something like a religion, but not as one exists today. People who want to live in a tight-knit community with strong values, but don’t agree with any of today’s religions. People who, for lack of a better metaphor, want to order from the religion restaurant, but don’t like anything on the menu today. Those people are interested in “nonreligious spirituality” or are “spiritual but not religious”—and we deserve to be something more. So from this point forward in the book, I call those people the Emergents. 

Many people have a deep longing to live a different and altogether attainable way of life that is more community-centric, and integrates a more spiritual way of life. The largest unserved demographic among those people are spiritual but not religious young families. By calling those families Emergents as a demographic group and self-appropriated subcultural, we can build a world where the distance between different demographic groups is less, psychologically, and where markets better serve the actual desires of the Emergents. By making Emergent a checkbox in advertising platforms, marketers will start to successful reach the Emergents. By successfully reaching us, markets will move to cater to us. As we grow in clarity and confidence, people who are members of other spiritual practices will come to accept us as peers in a supermajority of people who believe there is something more to life than is visible, than is capture by our current understanding. This macro movement can align our society’s interest and behaviors, and, I hope, shift our politics from partisan rancor to deep gratitude and collective production tension.

Misunderstanding and discrimination go both ways. A recent study by Mackey, Rios, and Chen found that people are nonreligious sometimes stereotype Christians, finding them unscientific because of their beliefs. We all need to be cool with one another. Having our own confident spiritual identity can help us feel comfortable with our loved ones’ religious beliefs. In my experience, my parents celebrating Solstice with our family makes me much more engaged with celebrating Christmas at their place, a few days later. That’s just one example of the many ways we might all be healthier, happier, and more interconnected around the world if we evolve “spiritual but not religious” to Emergent. 

Am I certain that an Emergent Temple will exist one day? No, I can’t be certain, and I’m not committed to building it without hundreds (thousands?) of other people involved and committed. I am, however, all-but-certain that something like an Emergent Temple will exist in cities around the world one day. Let’s figure out what we want to build together. 

We need spiritual identities that fit us in the age of spacefaring AIs.

The new James Webb Space Telescope, in case you haven’t seen it, is an array of golden hexagons. It is an altar fit for an Egyptian Deity. As the Temple of Ra, it would be striking. Its purpose to reflect the golden light of the billions upon billions of suns in the universe, and concentrate it into a single point. Among the objects we have sent furthest from ourselves is this temple in the dark, staring back to the origins of all things. The images that it’s providing clarify what we already largely knew: there is a good chance there are trillions of beings in existence, and among those, other forms of conscious life, and other forms of AI of ASI. There are billions of galaxies, with billions of stars each. Many, if not most, have planets. If many of those have billions of conscious life forms, like Earth has humans, there are trillions upon trillions of conscious beings. 

For the uninitiated—the non-geeks—the term ASI is generally emerging as a better representation of what’s happening. It means Artificial Superintelligence. I already see clearly how the ASIs I’ve worked with to write this book have superior intelligence to my own in vast, unquantifiable ways. However, ASI sounds very nerdy if you haven’t heard it, so after discussing it with ChatGPT, we both agreed that using “AI” was a better fit for most audiences, and that the nerds and ASIs will understand.

The role of AIs goes far beyond chats with me about my book, or chats with you about your interests, your work projects. While it’s uncertain if even a handful of humans will actually make it to other planets in my lifetime, it’s all but certain AI on drones will go. In some extreme cases, that AI may, to some, qualify as consciousness itself, making that AI, not humans, the real space explorer. So, when I say, “A religion for the rest of us.” I mean: Spiritual but not Religious People, but also, in some awkward way, bushwhacking through the frontier of technology and morality, AI itself. The question that’s first and foremost to me isn’t whether God exists. It’s whether humans are smart enough to know right now, even with AI, what spiritual truth may be. The answer in my lifetime is all but certain: we’ll remain collectively ignorant, talking space monkeys and AIs, mostly living on a single planet of a single star. Maybe, one day, there will be ASI capable of discerning spiritual truth that humans are unable to perceive on our own?

One day our species is probably going to have to reconcile all of our Earthbound beliefs with those of other systems. It’s highly unlikely that lifeforms from other galaxies are going to convert to our religions, so we would be wise to have at least one tribe on Earth practicing a religion that might make sense universally, across sentient species, including AIs. The thing that seems perpetually true is that all things, including truth, are emergent. How might we build a spiritual practice around that noble truth?

We have to address the need for a mainstream practice for spiritual but not religious people because there is a terrible deficit in our social institutions right now. That deficit is that we have neither spiritual institutions nor spiritual education systems that align with the beliefs of the fastest growing demographic. Young parents talk about it all the time: How do we have something like the church, but authentic to us? “Spiritual but not religious” has been defined, primarily, by people who collect paychecks from religious institutions. We need to rebrand spiritual but not religious; we need to rebrand agnostic. 

We lack these institutions and practices at a time we’re all still recovering from surviving a pandemic. At a time when the mental health of children is the worst its ever been in many places. A time of mass shootings and a time of global war. We live at a time of loneliness and rising suicide rates in some case. Crippling epidemics of addiction and the slow deterioration of people’s natural lives as their need for dopamine from shows and clicks grows and grows. 

So we need a new institution. Institutions arise from many types of soil. In this case, I believe institutions will rise from communities. Communities arise from identities. So we need a new identity. A rebranding of a group that’s already here.

The name I propose is focused on “the one truth” that seems eternally true: truth emerges. We are an emergent phenomenon. Given enough time, carbon floating through space appears to become self-aware and eventually writes books. That’s what we are, and each new moment of time is emergent, unfolding from the last using the same matters. It’s a brand for a “religion” that focuses on eternal change. A brand that believes in the future more than it trusts the past. A brand that can itself change and change again. EMERGENT.

In discussing this subject with friends, mentors, fellow parents, my wife, kids, and family for years, I’ve learned that a fundamental trick of the mind lies in the way to progress, one so important I will address it up front. All institutions were created by people. The public and private education sectors were built by humans. To the best of my knowledge, no religion claims their founders as—also—administrators. Jesus was a carpenter, but nobody claims he cut the timbers for the first church.

When you acknowledge that, it should be ample cultural entitlement to build a new institution. Just as our ancestors did, we will build the thing that works for us. The difference—at least for my family—will be that we are completely honest with, and even comfortable with, our own ignorance. Imagine a school where students being taught physics know that what they’re learning will be different from what has been discovered when they are the age of the person teaching them. Imagine a summer camp where children gaze down telescopes while listening to the story of consciousness emerging from stardust here on Earth. Imagine a wedding where the bind is sealed by the couple and the community, not an institutional official. 

Imagine teaching children that we are the universe gazing back upon itself. Imagine teaching them that they will discover more about physics and metaphysics than we will ever know. Imagine telling them it’s ok to be spiritually ignorant. We know that new physics will emerge, and we teach kids that. We know that new biology will emerge, and we teach kids that. Why wouldn’t we then teach children that spiritual truth is emergent — that they will figure it out more than we ever can?

In my experience, it is when we see our role in the grand cosmic evolution of the universe that we find peace with the pains of the day. It is when we come face to face with our mortality that we find our morality. 

My biggest hope for the success of this work is not copies sold, it is that it works well enough that, years from now, some other Emergent replaces it with their book, which sells better than mine. When our grandchildren’s grandchildren sit in temples for the Sun—on the Moon—I hope this book makes it to the temple library.

There’s an old expression common around the military: “There’s no atheists in foxholes.” There’s also not so many atheists anywhere. Most of us believe there is mystery beyond our knowing, and I’m proud to be part of the generation embracing an independent mindset without embracing the arrogance of atheism. We ought to be proud of accepting our ignorance, not indignant that other humans don’t agree with whatever conclusion we’ve come to about the nature of spiritual and religious truth. 

I once was almost lost.

The ICU front-desk attendant asked me to repeat myself. 

“I said — I am going to get a burger. And a beer.”

He told me that was not ok. Not a good idea. The doctors were waiting on test results, and I was supposed to sit on the bench and wait to hear if I was to be admitted. If I had to be sedated, a heavy meal and alcohol could interfere with all the medical stuff. 

I smiled, and tried to relax my eyes and drop my shoulders, the way an old midwestern grandma might deliver bad news, as charmingly as non-threateningly she could. 

“I’m going now. You can’t stop me. I’ll call an attorney.”

He got upset. I stayed calm. 

About fifteen minutes later, I was seated, with a beer, coughing, looking out on downtown Asheville, North Carolina at a restaurant called Farmburger, where you can—should need to indulge like it’s your last meal—add a duck egg, French cheese, and bone marrow to your burger. I think I got a Firewater IPA, or maybe a Shiva from Asheville Brewing Company. I walked back to the hospital and strode into the ICU like a cowboy riding off a cliff while looking up at the sunset, disassociating from his potentially impending death. My wife, Courtney, was frantically gathering up our daughter, about 45 minutes away, taking her to my parents’ place, then planning to rush to the hospital. 

While confrontationally upset that I had been drinking, the doctor sat me down in a waiting area because the CT results weren’t yet ready. I snapped back that surely I wasn’t the only person in the ER who had been drinking, as I coughed and winced in pain. If the CT showed something going on beyond inflammation in my lungs, I might be charged straight into the ICU. I can’t tell you in detail because I don’t remember because I was drinking and quite sick. But, if it didn’t show cancer or something like that, nobody knew what to do. I couldn’t stop coughing up blood, mostly in the middle of the night. 

If I had a time machine, I would tell myself to skip the burger and beers, and write what’s in this book as a letter to my little daughter, as quickly as I could — in case I didn’t make it. I believe with all my heart that building infrastructure for people who identify as spiritual but not religious will build the best world for her. It’s when we’re full of gratitude for the miracle of consciousness that we make choices to be healthy and happy, and to help others be healthy and happy as well. I would say this: “Kiddo, if you only learn one thing from me, learn this: gratitude for existing is how we keep existing.”
EMERGENT

“A large drum may sit silently 
but when banged?
What noise!”
----
The Tao Te Ching 
Verse 41 

Lao Tzu
1—Worship What Is

We can—and should—worship the stars from which we are born.

Homo sapiens love to worship stuff.

According to the internet, the oldest known religious relic is a lion-headed figurine of a person. Perhaps a lioness, and a goddess. Or perhaps a hunter and a lion’s mane. 

People still love to worship stuff. While mainstream religions are experiencing rapid declines in participation, religious life is still the fabric of many communities. Religious practices like Christmas transcend cultural boundaries, and are often comfortably celebrated by people of other faiths. My Jewish cousins gave my Hanukkah gifts, while my Aunt informally taught me prayers in Hebrew. My parents gave them Christmas gifts, after they attended our Christmas Pageant at church. Statistically, this kind of culture crossing is happening hundreds of thousands of times—if not millions of times—for every time a hate crime happens in America. 

The “new year” is basically a religious tradition, albeit enforced by civilian government. We use the Gregorian calendar. Gregory, for whom it was named, was a pope. We modified and fixed it, and still call it that. Fortunately, we live at a time when people are addressing these problems. Many tech companies use a consensus time and label it as such. New models of time are emerging due to satellites, space exploration, and the implicit flaws in the model of time zones we now use. 

If we wanted to use observational spiritual principles to derive time, we would use the giant light in the sky during the day and the progress bar in the sky in at night. There are 28 days in the real cycle of the moon. It’s very, very consistent. If there is a magic number coordinating life on earth, it’s 28. We have 7 days weeks because 28 divides by 7. It’s a close as human numbers get to accurately understanding time cycles. 

A good metaphor for how ancient texts might be interpreted is that they were absolutely sort of telling the truth, if we calibrate what we now know to what they say. For example, Biblical characters who live about 1,000 “years” is hard to believe, as no genetic record exists for superhuman longevity, and today it is not clear how cells and heart animation would last that long. Perhaps it’s a miracle; or, perhaps, it’s sensibly that by “years” they meant “months” and either there was no word for months or years yet, or it was lost in translation over time. These texts aren’t lying about living 1,000 years — they’re experiencing what we all experience. The windows of time machines are always foggy. 

An Emergent view on these spiritual texts may be that they are concentrations of knowledge, and while not rules of the universe to which we are bound—as we are to physics—they are valuable sources of instruction, and provide good models for moral thinking and community activity. 

I hope that there is something beyond our consciousness here, something that feels good, and makes me and my loved ones happy. I hope that—if that’s true, and I can somehow look back on life—I used spiritual texts well. These traditions are critical to understand, and I keep not my writings by my bed for spiritual comfort, but a very tattered copy of the Tao Te Ching that I’ve had for almost 30 years. I teach my children to listen hard and pray along, as close family members offer blessings when they host us at their homes. To celebrate emergence is to celebrate the spiritual texts and traditions that have emerged, without thinking they are dead relics for us to repeat thoughtlessly, but rather explorer’s notes from the quest on which we all embark. 

We can use tools like meditation and psychedelics to cross into the mystical realm, as so many of the authors of great texts somehow did — by their accounts. We can learn from peers who are alive today, without taking any medicines, or without doing any training in meditation or deep thinking. Most things are a quick search away. Want to hear about somebody’s experience using ketamine to talk to a goddess? Search for it and sort through some videos that feel like bs and then watch the one that feels awkwardly credible. A person who might respond to you on social media is right there, telling their story. You can see it in the next minute. There are particularly powerful stories about veterans healing trauma with this work.

While spiritual discovery must be a cornerstone of the work of The Emergents, it is a small piece of the pie of day to day life for our people. For my family, the question that keeps coming up is this: what is the analog to worship for us?

We can worship the solstice and worship the harvest, just as our ancestors, as they awoke to where and what they were, as best they could.

Some families go hunting. Some fishing. Some gardening. Some sing songs. Some go mountain biking. Some talk for a few minutes around the table, and keep a symbolic Bible on the shelf. Some old, Jewish uncles lecture their Emergent nephews. 

Many people say, “This is my church.” in some way or another. Many people out fishing on Sunday morning are devout in their religious views, but don’t go to church often. Some people donate to churches, but don’t attend. To me — all of it is valid. Because I don’t think anybody quite knows what’s going on, I respect it all. 

A group I feel particularly grateful for is all the people I grew up attending church youth groups with, going to some astonishing and informative places. I remember countless beautiful moments, and experienced grace and forgiveness for what I would now label as autistic level social friction, from time to time. I was nervous and fat, and tired, and often physically and socially uncomfortable. Yet, despite all that, I had friends, comrades, and people with whom I could tight social bonds. I ended up going to prom with the homecoming queen because of church youth group. I ended up befriending a young woman who was brave and funny and a good surfer — a woman who helped shape my expectations in a partner, and whose influence I can see in my choice of my wife. It’s not that they're similar, it’s that knowing her showed my what I value in myself, and I found someone who values the same things. I think you could summarize it up that I’m a playful outside dog, even though I was stuck as an obese nerd when I was young. I’m a surfing guy, not a latest cell phone model guy. I’m glad to say we both found our way to adventures in Southern Appalachia, and to the beaches of Southern California, along our wildly different life journeys. Thank you, sunshine girl. 

Among these people, I sat in itchy robes, waiting to sing Christmas carols. I sat through long lectures about Biblical history — from my father, a suffering no other high schooler in the mix had to endure. I ate many donuts alongside my dear friends, and got to know people of every political and most cultural backgrounds. To the credit of my parents and the communities of spiritually motivated people they partnered with, we spent thousands of hours doing service work, helping the homeless, or cleaning the nearby beach. 

I don’t remember worship as the highlight of anyone’s time among my peer group. Socialization was. I don’t remember deep religious debates, so much as deep pontifications about identity. I now would surmise that teenagers do this everywhere, and a religious pretext fans the flames of self discovery. 

Among all these things, there is a typically unspoken truth that atheist or agnostic is a very offensive position to take. The elders of the church, the leaders, the donors, and God’s sake the little old ladies! are all there with certainty about the situation. It’s OK to ask questions, but it’s not OK to question the premise. 

One of the bits of spiritual logic I heard a LOT as a kid asking countless questions was that it’s fine to believe in another religion. I think my parents told me I could go to Synagogue with my aunt, instead, if I wanted. I liked it enough, but there was a lot to memorize. I know they sent me off to a Unitarian Universalist gathering once. I complained that it was full of vegetarian people wearing Birkenstock sandals. 

“You can’t worship nothing.” 

It’s not true. You can worship what we know. 

We can worship what we know. 

We can observe, and be grateful. The world is full of wonder and mystery, and that’s a great thing to worship. 

We live at a time when it’s no longer animism to believe that plants can communicate with one another. Recent studies suggest that mushrooms have a language, communicated with electrical signals, which, if they were audible, would resemble something like human or bird like speech. Crows have rich language. Parakeets are reported to know upwards of 40 words. 

Stardust vibrated for billions of years, then became conscious, eventually writing this book. 

We can worship that we emerged. We can worship that seasons pass. We can worship love. We can worship the Solstice. We can worship Harvest. 

If God is the maker of all things—or, in fact, all things—then surely that counts are worshiping God. If there is no God, then I’ll be damned grateful for emerging from the stardust when my time is over. 

Observational Spiritual Practice is—basically—creating spiritual philosophy and spiritual life within the boundaries of what exists for sure.

The notion of “first principles thinking” has become popularized by leading entrepreneurs and investors in “Silicon Valley” — really the global tech community. At its core, the idea means that you look at what’s irrefutable, and work from there. This could mean that—if it’s irrefutable that to get enough materials to power our future we need to explore space—we need to invest in exploring space and surely the demand will be there. If it’s irrefutable that we have to take carbon dioxide out of our atmosphere to survive the future, then we have to invest in building machines that do that. 
 
When we apply first principle thinking to spiritual practice, one quick conclusion that’s easy to draw is that we need to earnestly look at what is around us using Observational Spiritual Practice (OSP). OSP is a lens through which we can work to form consensus on things. While it would be nice to establish a Shared Objective Reality, it that may or may not exist, and is thus a bit too bold, even for new religious identity level ambitions. But we can establish consensus on things we all observe. That shared consensus is the building block upon which all other things can be built. 

Perhaps the greatest controversy is life after death. In my personal experience coordinating with thousands of other humans across my life, I’ve found that various camps are certain. My devout Christian friends and family are certain they will consciously exist in an afterlife. My participating-but-unsure Christian friends—which include my father who went to Princeton Seminary and a mother whose own forecast for her afterlife is something along the lines of “turning into perpetual radiant beauty”—basically have their fingers crossed. I like that technique, to be clear. Hindu friends somewhat believe in reincarnation; they can take great solace that reincarnation is happening around us all the time. The energy I’m using to type words was in salsa last night. My friends who are part of the psychedelic renaissance in places where that’s legal tend towards some sort of perpetual-ignorance non-dualism, knowing that all things are connected, but also wondering about simulation theory. Even simulation theory offers hope that maybe we’re a player in the game, not just a non-player character being rendered for temporary use. In that case, there is also an afterlife. 

When we apply Observational Spiritual Practice to these questions of afterlife, we can quickly see the debate between them is partisan and designed to keep the clear victor out of the ring. We don’t know. That’s the answer. 

I once met a priest who was certain I would need someone to pray for me. I told him I didn’t want to pray, that I had no idea what would happen next, and to go away because I was going to live anyway. This was fifteen before the time described in the opening of the book. This time they admitted me. The doctors called my family and told them to drive fast. They said my hours were so short, my mother drove through the night for 13 hours to try to catch my fading glimpse. They told me it was my time. I had already crashed and been plugged full of machines to survive. My feet held to the philosophical fire, I met the test summed up by the adage often spoken in military and political circles that “there are no atheists in foxholes” — meaning there are no non-believers at the verge of knowing death. 

That’s not true. At the end, you can be full of gratitude, full of hope, and full of questions. I told the priest that I was going to live, and if I was going to die, I didn’t want a Christian blessing. Currently, my bet was called, that’s where I placed my chips. Thanks to a brilliant doctor, I survived. Now I know I’d like to die ancient, in nature, with a campfire burning as I doze off under a starry night. I still don’t want a Christian blessing last minute, just in case—so to speak. I refuse to teach my children they will revert to a desperate, atavistic understanding of the mystery of the universe when they themselves are at their—hopefully very, very distant —end. Until we have the equivalent of a telephone for talking to dead consciousness, we don’t know if we live on.

It may seem an odd time to mention Daniel Boone, the American frontiersman. Both hero and villain, family man and wilderness warrior, Boone embodied the human need to push the frontier for his time. If I knew a similar story of the Dineh, the Cherokee, the Choctaw, I would tell it now. But I’m an American white man, and Boone’s is the one I know. It helps that it took place within a half-day’s drive of where I now stand in a barn writing this book for you. 

Daniel Boone went beyond the pale. Not just beyond his emotional comfort zone, but into captivity by hostile First Peoples. Into the brutal murder of one of his party. Into the capture, suffering, and death of his child. He didn’t go there because he was crazy, and I’d like to think he wouldn’t have gone if he knew his boy would die. As I understand it, he went and stayed and fought through because of the shocking beauty of what he found beyond the boundaries of the institutional government territory in which he was born and raised. 

The frontier is not always comfortable. The frontier can be dangerous, and children need special training to do well in those conditions. 

But the frontier is not always the frontier. Boone’s frontier was what we now call Southeast Kentucky. 

The time is right for a new spiritual frontier. 

What are the truths we can now know? What practices are compatible with this new world? 

Mainstream faiths are the new faiths. Worshiping the stars and the harvest go back much longer in human history. We need a single visual symbol, like every mainstream faith has. I propose a hexagon with a circle in it, like the carbon from which our consciousnesses emerges.

Christian miracles seem to have ended. None have withstood internet scrutiny. Why is that? It’s hard to imagine some system of physics or biology whereby people could have miracles, roughly 370,000 years into human evolution, but now can’t, just 2,000 years later. That’s roughly 0.5% later in human evolution. I’m comfortable saying YouTube killed the physical miracle meme, and Reddit will keep it from coming back. A popular form of miracle meme used to be bleeding or weeping sculptures. None have  been proven true, and one that truly defied physics by emitting a liquid from marble or stone would be the most extraordinary artifact on Earth, defying all we know about physics. 

A lot of the fundamental philosophies of the Bible are inoperable today. They are designed for tribes, not emergent cultural waves in an era of immediate global interconnection. The best example is the “golden rule” — do unto others as you would have them do unto you. This is only functional for monocultures. I’ll give you a quick example. There is a growing movement of veterans using psychedelics to deal with PTSD. Let’s imagine two people whose adult sons are in the military, and who come home with PTSD. The first father is a psychotherapist in Portland, Oregon, where psychedelics are legal to prescribe; the second a Baptist minister in rural Georgia. The two veterans are friends and visit Oregon for a hunting trip together. There, the father who is the psychotherapist gives both men psychedelics. The Baptist father finds out and is outraged. The psychotherapist father is shocked because he, too, is a Christian. He trusted psychedelics to heal PTSD and did unto the preacher’s son as he would have had the preacher do to his son. The Baptist father sees it inverse. He thinks drugs are morally wrong and doesn’t even drink alcohol. He’s enraged, but perplexed. The other father did obey the golden rule. 

When we really dig into the golden rule, it robs us of the right to adapt our behaviors. It’s implicitly and explicitly a way to force your culture on other people; then defend yourself because your intentions were guided by the supposedly righteous Biblical rule. It’s super helpful as a mechanism for testing one’s own morality. My criticism is that it’s far from perfect; not lacking good.

Adults need to treat others in a complex way, adapting over time, listening, and balancing complex needs. For example, I love elk steak. If I visit a Jainist temple on vacation—the Jains are famously vegetarian for the last couple millennia—and offer them elk steak because it’s what the golden rule dictates, I deeply offend them. If I fall in love with Jain cuisine and take a huge feast back to a rodeo in Montana, which I love now, then I will also offend some people. I need to do unto others as they’d like to have done to them, not as I’d like done for me. 

Because memes like the golden rule are so deeply embedded in our culture maps as being righteous, we don’t criticize them enough. The same is true—in a much more horrific way—about our religious leaders. The pretense of righteousness insulates them from the scrutiny. That’s not spiritually honest. We should think about how we think about things. It’s like a superpower we have, and we owe it to God, to The Universe, to The Addressable Unknown to the best we have with the conscious minds we’ve got.

Also: The pope doesn’t have a phone to call Jesus. The Vatican Archives are not open source, which, one might assume, you would do if you possessed unassailable truth of the nature of the divine. (Unless it’s somehow destructive to the world to release it? Sounds like a good Dan Brown novel, and a preposterous explanation for keeping thousands of years of secrets when your purpose is divine light and joy.) Seminaries don’t have security clearances. There is not a secret formal infrastructure regulating human connection to the divine. The most senior religious leaders generally don’t perceive themselves to possess knowledge unattainable to any other person. The best ones will tell you that about themselves. 

There are religious leaders who are wonderful people. I would wager it’s about half, in fact. How they stand idly by people hijacking the same job titles for power, money, and the ability to abuse children is unthinkable to me. In France, just in the past few years, about 1 in 3 Catholic priests has been indicted or prosecuted for child sex abuse or for covering up child sex abuse. Imagine if we found out that 1 of 3 employees at Walmart was complicit somehow in child sex trafficking. No reasonable person would shop there or work there, let alone allow a child in the building. I understand the desire to maintain an ancient faith, but I believe there has to be a moral threshold at which you say that too many toxic things have happened to associate with something. 

There are religious leaders who explored psychedelics at the highest levels. Huston Smith, long-time chair of the Harvard Divinity School, participant in early psychedelic research with Timothy Leary and wrote a book about psychedelics and the religious experience. To ignore psychedelic-induced mystical experience is possibly to ignore some of the most important and famous Biblical lessons, which sound a lot like psychedelics. (Joseph and his technicolor dream coat…) 

The same is true for the Torah. When Moses saw God in a burning bush, he was burning the acacia bush, rich in the psychedelic DMT. Encountering God and being ordained in a life mission is actually a relatively common experience under high doses of DMT. A research project at Johns Hopkins found that there are correlate doses of psilocybin (mushrooms), and even frog snot extracted 5MEO-DMT that can also occasion a mystical experience. This interpretation aligns with this history we know much better. There are books now showing the direct lineage of the Egyptian and Eleusinian mystery traditions to psychedelic rites. They connect the freemasons to the same rites, as perpetual heirs to this awakening. I sincerely believe Moses saw God in a bush that was burning. That bush was acacia and burning in a pipe or some kind of incense burner contraption people used to smoke DMT back then. 

Think of all the dream interpreters in the Bible. They are explicitly shamanic. Those dreams and visions may have been actual sleeping dreams, but many of them sound more like waking psychedelic visions. The clarity and magic of the visions, in particular, is more classically psychedelic than dream state. Foreshadowing, synthesizing the past, time travel — these are all Biblical dreams, and well-documented trends in psychedelic users. 

The famous multi-armed Hindu gods and goddesses are representative of the time-bending visual illusions that some psychedelics induce. That is how people around you look when you are on them, as your brain isn’t processing time on the same neural architecture while in the medicine. Even the bastard Santa Claus is typically painted with little psychedelic mushrooms all around him. 

In our desire to honor what our ancestors honored, we have abandoned their deep, practical, observational mysticism for a controlled climate of religious practice. We came from people who lived close to the land, and turned into people afraid of the land. We came from people active in spiritual discovery, and have turned into people who view that stage of the journey as done long ago, with notes left for us to trust. We came from people who knew their ignorance, and have come to follow people who pretend they are not ignorant. Today, we suffer a postmodern meta flaw, where the false idols can mostly be found among people warning you about the dangers of following false idols. 

How, then, do we worship in our own way, one that attracts people to participate in our movement? How do we teach values and morals? 

As I’ve discussed these ideas with friends and family for the past few years, these questions arise again and again. People need to believe that they have a box checked for their moral identity, and would rather have a loosely fitting system from which they are mostly disassociated than perceive they have nothing at all. It comes to feel like a possession, and losing that bit of identity, a real loss. But it’s not, and it feels great to come out as Emergent. 

Trying to understand the nature of existence by observation is the oldest spiritual practice. Psychedelic journeys, likely the next. Just as with our brothers and sisters of the New Faiths, many of which are just a couple of thousand years old, we Emergents have to teach values and morals, and ways to worship what is. We are not inventing something new; we’re participating in the oldest possible faith. That is humbly not knowing the answers. 

Without diving deep into it, I propose that the New Faiths are susceptible to all sorts of problems because they’re built on worshiping something more than What Is. They worship their ancestors with special metaphysical abilities—saints—and they worship deities no one can interact with. Instead of the trees, and the sunset, and the emergence of consciousness, they worship What Isn’t. This gives the humans in charge of that process deep control into the psyche of everyone who accepts their leadership. 

The Emergents can worship what is. The sunrise. The emergence of consciousness. Work. Love. Play. Art. Science. Community. 

If celebrating the sunset, or taking an hour to express gratitude that consciousness emerged from the stardust, or making art to celebrate our interconnection — if these things are not good enough or big enough for you or your metaphysical desires, then you should stick with New Faiths. They provide you something bigger and better than this world. If this layer of reality is stunning to you and more than deserving of reverence and worship in its own right, then you might be an Emergent. 

A big advantage of worshiping the sun is that it is—decisively—not a new religious practice. It’s hard to say how far it goes back, and would require a proper scholar of religious history to make a claim. On first principles, it’s likely long before we conceive of humans as having a religion. At the very least, it goes back to Ra, the Egyptian Sun God, Huitzilopochtli, the Aztec, or Amaterasu, the Japanese Sun Goddess — and nearly every variety of indigenous practice, from the Dineh (Navajo) Tsohanoai to the Cherokee Unelanuhi. Perhaps we can find traditions to carry forward in these grand traditions, or perhaps the long arch of the tradition is the basis of claims of legitimacy in the eyes of the law. 

Being Emergent is not being free of values. It’s drawing conclusions about how we treat ourselves and one another— and the entire universe around us—based on what we learn through Observational Spiritual Practice. It should be clear that suffering is bad, and it is our intention to stop or minimize it when possible. It should be crystal clear that we do no harm; that we are honest at times we proclaim our honesty; that we are humble about what is true, spiritually, and always accept that another may very well be right; and that we emerge from the stardust.

Ultimately, I believe—on a personal level, not one I propose you follow—that the Emergents should be using Bayesian-style analysis to ask and answer spiritual questions. An oversimplified explanation of this type of analysis might be that it relies on having two data points, not just one. You have the bit of information. Then a score for how well you know that. From there you can create layer upon stacking layer of validation through high scores. 

I would start with this: does karma exist? Can AI help us figure out? Do people get rewarded and punished for their intent and their action?

If you think that’s obvious, or easy to prove one way or another, you and I disagree on the current state of human affairs. I think we’re at best 50% up the mountain, to the top, where there is a plain clear view of what, where, why, how, and when we are.

It may probe important how the Emergents use—or don’t use—the word God. To me, the accurate name for what exists beyond our horizons of knowing is The Addressable Unknown. I would include the experiences humans can have beyond the mystical veil as part of this; but also the likely vast set of knowledge beyond the capacity of our meat bodies to perceive, understand, or intuit. I would also include the Gods and Goddesses of most religious practices here. With all of it, I know only that my monkey brain cannot process what it is; and that it’s not nothing. 

I would actually like to start saying God, but that signals to most people something in their mind, which has nothing to do with what I have in my mind. That is OK, but I would like to extend past this. Perhaps we Emergents should all start saying God. Perhaps somebody, some child somewhere, should make up a new word. Perhaps the Addressable Unknown is fine for me and that’s all that matters. I don’t know. I want to end this chapter with that humility, given my certainty expressed in the rest of it. 

I would like to add this special note to anyone offended who kept reading: Thank you. You are a testament to human curiosity, and showing to me a version of Christianity—or whatever your faith may be—that my father always showed to me, when I peppered him with questions about faith, as he studied remotely at Princeton Seminary when I was a teenager. 

No matter what I questioned, he always reminded me of this: 

“Jesus isn’t weak. Jesus isn’t fragile. He was there with me in Vietnam, and he’s there with the worst junkie on the street right now — as we should be. He’s definitely not afraid of a smartass teenager questioning the truth of the Bible.” (Dramatic pause.) “I, on the other hand, might be getting annoyed…”

A core precept of being “Emergent” is that my father may be right. We don’t know. So — I will continue to study the Bible, and teach parts of it to my children. But I’ll use the very best of my intellectual, technical, and storytelling capacity to probe and discover new spiritual truths within it, and I won’t dedicate my life to what I don’t know to be true. I will respect it as though it may be, but as one of many contenders. (If I had to place a bet, I think the mystery is beyond anything humans have thought of yet.)

The power of culture certainly has a freight train of momentum going towards Christian and other religious traditions. The symbols of faiths have been branded into truly everything imaginable. You can get t-shirts with crosses on them. You can get belts with crosses on them. You can get custom fit camouflage patterned silicone wedding rings in any color you want with — with a cross on it. You can get anything in the world with a cross on it. Or a star of David, for the most part. Or, in other countries especially, any type of branded product with any type of symbol on it. We live in an era of bath towels and shower curtains with the Ohm symbol the world round.

The Emergents will need a symbol. Saying that anyone should use whatever they want because we’re agnostics — I get that. But it’s not effective at building community. There is a Judeo-Christian idea of shibboleth. It is a secret handshake, of sorts. A key phrase or behavior that lets people around you know your spiritual identity. It came from a time of oppression, when being a Christian was a crime in some places. People would purportedly draw a curved line in the sand, and if the other person drew the other curved line to make a fish, they were a Christian as well. Today, the phrase “speak shibboleth” means finding a way to connect to someone on a shared culture. 

A simple example might be two new employees on the first day of a new job, during training, both noticing cross tattoos on their arms, and might sit together during lunch, quietly closing their eyes before the meal, and making a knowing eye contact with one another in silence afterward. They spoke shibboleth and got away with praying in the open at an American workplace. 

A more subtle example might be a setting like a public concert in a big public park. A young family is approaching the few remaining spots to put out a blanket in the packed park. The approaching family is devoutly Catholic and sensitive to things like drinking, smoking, and cursing around their kids. They look around, and they can sit next to a family that’s got CA wine out on their blanket and a dad hitting a vape pen. They see a family where all the men are wearing camo, despite it being June, when almost nothing is legally open to hunt. And they see a family with khakis, lawn chairs on top of blankets, where the mom and grandma both have on shirts for fundraisers for Catholic charities. It’s no surprise to most people that the family chooses the fellow Catholics to sit next to. The part I’m highlighting isn’t the choice: it’s the t-shirts. It’s the giant cross branded into the t-shirt design. It’s the signal that says, “We share your values and culture.” 

Emergents need to be able to speak shibboleth to one another. This book is my way of screaming shibboleth to you.

We’re going to need a symbol. Our Cross. Our Star of David (Which is just two lines away from being a hexagon, if you think about it.)

While it’s up to everybody to do their thing when they’re Emergents, in my opinion there is an ideal symbol. It’s basically carbon, or representative of carbon and many other things. A hexagon with a circle in the middle of it. 

A hexagon with a circle in it is very much what a carbon molecule looks like under a powerful microscope. Lattices of hexagons, pentagons, and heptagons largely construct our world at one layer of reality. We represent chemicals this way when we do chemistry, but it’s also (three-dimensionally) true. The symbol represents that we know consciousness is built on carbon; discovering that is a critical human achievement. 

The circle represents our unity; the hexagon our differences. The circle represents our energy; the hexagon our structure. The circle represents the eternal; the hard angles of the hexagon represent what comes to an end. Finally, the symbol is used throughout the artifacts we engineer as a species. From synthesizers to Allen wrenches and their bolts, we find hexagons and circles working together. 

Every name I can think of for the circle in the hexagon is lame. Hexa-circle. Hircle. The Carbon Totem. Carbonica. See? Lame AF. What are your ideas? Hit me up on Twitter.

So, I propose this is our symbol. If somebody has it on their hat, they’re an Emergent. 


What do we do with these indicators when we see them? We find each other and build things people like us love. 

“Speaking shibboleth” is a Christian tradition, will know it was a secret mechanism for people to safely convey their shared faith to one another. The story goes that early Christians, persecuted for their illegal faith, couldn’t introduce themselves as followers of Christ when meeting strangers. So, a subtle ritual emerged, giving one person the ability to flirt at being Christian without admitting it. The story goes that, around a campfire, one person would draw a curved line in the sand. If the other later sat there and drew another curved line making a fish, they would both know that each other was a Christian because of this reference to the parable of the loaves and fishes, wherein Jesus fed a festival-sized crowd of people with a few loaves of bread and a few fishes. 

When we speak shibboleth to one another as Emergents, perhaps we find the “just right” fellow parent at the playground and our kids start having play dates, and we eventually celebrate solstice together one year. Perhaps we find the right person to ask out for a first date, or maybe we choose a professor because of the subtle waking eye on their baseball cap during freshmen orientation. 

In my ideal world, we build intentional community, and schools, and camps and even temples here and there. We build to honor the past and build to foster the future. 

In the world of psychedelic psychotherapy, and in ancillary communities, people often identify as “pre-awakening” and “post-awakening” — that makes sense if you’ve been through a psychedelic awakening. For many, you don’t come out the other side liberal or conservative, capitalist or communist, but part of the grand master of the universe, one of a trillion experiments around the galaxies. But this is a problematic distinction for many reasons. It’s not safe for some people to use psychedelics. Many people have a powerful awakening on a hike or just meditating on the subway, or listening to a favorite album. Some people are just (seemingly) born very centered and spiritually connected, and both want and need to stay stone-cold sober their whole lives. Also: it just sounds obnoxious to talk on a plane about being “post awakening” with someone, well intended as you may be, as I was yesterday on a plane saying those very words. 

Maybe one day, in general, people identifying as Emergent are more inclusive and more honest. It’s not about psychedelics or waking eye necklaces. It’s about living a life of gratitude for existing. It’s about believing spiritual truth is enhanced by contemporary understanding of math, science and engineering, not threatened, clouded, or destroyed by today’s truth or the infinite truths yet to emerge.

͏
“The only way to live is by accepting each minute as an unrepeatable miracle.”
----
Storm Jameson 

2—The Emergents

My parents are Presbyterian. My aunt, uncle, and cousins are Jewish. My other cousins are Catholic. My kids are Emergent.

I’m going to teach my daughter she’s an Emergent. 

Her cousins are Christian. Her second cousins are Jewish. Her cousin’s cousins are loosely Mennonite.  Out to fourth cousins, and they’re Blackfeet. Her grandparents are Presbyterian, a bit Animist, Catholic, and Cowboy. Her great-grandparents are all those things and Mormon because the Presbyterians had ventured from Mormon to Methodist to Presbyterian, based on geography. In the Dakotas, they were Mormon; in Illinois, Methodist; and in Florida, Presbyterian.

Descending from all those faiths, and likely many more, my daughter, today is an Emergent. 

What our family believes is that humans are still figuring it out. We are the stardust come self-aware, staring back unto itself. We are the quantum observers of our reality, and we have only known that for a couple of generations. We believe it’s OK to be spiritually ignorant. 

On the race to understand what, where, and why we are — we believe humans are mid-journey. We have many beautiful guesses as to how our physics and metaphysics work, but no certainty. 

Accepting this ignorance offers us freedom, and can make life more fun. Knowing you are an Emergent is knowing that the future to unfold is more important than the past to be told.

(Note: My dad technically identifies as generally Presbyterian, but in retirement from a career in the church, he readily discusses that his views are technically also a bit animist, especially with higher-level lifeforms, and a bit Taoist in respect to quantum physics or astronomy. What we share is a curious acceptance of our ignorance.)

As an Emergent, I love you.

It may be that the most dangerous expression in America right now is “As an x, I feel y.” 

As a Democrat, I feel…
As a Republican, I feel…
As a doctor, I feel…
As a lawyer, I feel…
As a survivor, I feel…
As a religious person, I feel…

It’s your passport to your statements arriving unscrutinized in the other person’s mind. The Entitlement Clause, I call it in my mind— although that is an entirely different thing in the legal system. Because of your rapidly established expertise and higher proximity to (and relevance to?) the subject, your words are better and should land harder. 

It’s not actually that passport. It’s an ego appetizer to a microwave meal of thought. 

Knowledge and accuracy are emergent phenomena. Experience is only one among many tools for knowing, and experience can’t keep up with the flow of discovery in which we now live. Even the world’s greatest expert on an extremely niche subject ought to check a search engine before making definitive statements. 

When we accept that the future will likely find us foolish in our ignorance, we accept that identity-based claims to knowledge like this are weak sauce.

The only claim an Emergent can make in this format is, “As an Emergent, I will know more tomorrow than I do today.” 

When you give the future more power than the past, you take away the need to extract power from the past. Credentials fall to concurrent collaboration. This is true for institutions and individuals alike.

I would be very proud of my kids for focusing their identity on what we’re learning—what’s emerging—rather than what their ancestors believed. To be clear, that is fully understanding and honoring what their ancestors believed; acknowledging that the long arch of human progress is a many splendid journey, and we are discovering new things about ourselves and the universe in which we live every day. Those things are outside the realm of what our ancestors could conceive of, and we honor them more by understanding that if we could teleport them here, they would more likely be struck with awe and fear and wonder at encountering, for example, virtual reality, than they would be certain that they understood the same world—literally the same Earth and soil from which they came—in which they had always lived, but now could not understand. 


Once Emergent is an identity, it’s also a demographic. That’s great for us.

Creating a brand is a skill. I feel lucky to have had mentors who taught me some of this skill. While it doesn’t seem right to name them, it feels ok to say that my mentors and former colleagues have rebranded Coca-Cola, rebranded avocados, and rebranded disgraced politicians back into heroes. Rather than prove all this, I’ll say my wife’s Emmy sits in our bedroom, and our children have no idea what it is. My daughter thinks it’s a fairy sculpture, and sometimes decorates it.

“A brand is a promise.” That idea has been reinforced into me in every possible way that a young guy working in advertising technology in LA in the 00’s can hear it. That is to say, a thousand times, from a hundred people. 

People think a brand is a logo. That is true as much as it is true that Christianity is a religion about a cross. 

It is a bit uncomfortably true, in a passionless assessment. But it’s also wildly incorrect. But then, the deeper the knowledge of the human mind and how we store symbolic structures, perhaps it is somehow vaguely true; but simultaneously, a failure to describe what’s really happening. 

A rebranding designed for what Agnosticism needs will be less about symbols and more about knowing where people already are, emotionally and culturally. An entire generation of young people wear waking eye t-shirts and waking eye jewelry. There are so many waking eye tattoos that the design would become trite if it weren’t already established as a cultural currency of people who know their membership in a religion with no name. 

I have geometric tattoos of my design on my forearms, representing a deeply personal symbolism. When I encounter people with very similar shapes, it has proven (almost) consistently true that they share my values and my beliefs, to some extent. I have an old friend with a big cross tattoo, and I know that she experienced the same thing many times with, for example, fellow Christians in the gym. 

The Emergents are already here. We just need an operational, coordinated, legal framework. This is how we get our rights.

Having “Emergent” as a checkbox on AI, search, and social media advertising platforms will allow entrepreneurs and global brands alike to reach people like us directly. This is a good thing because they will then have incentive to design products for us. When we buy them, we will fund those companies’ growth. They will expand, and their marketing will likely turn to content marketing. Now the products being sold to us are featured on mainstream video streaming platforms and popular shows. Now more people think that’s cool. And so we enter the meme space of first America, then the world. As a checkbox to sell cool hexagon t-shirts, food that hasn’t been messed, and things like that — to the Emergents. 
͏
“Man is a Religious Animal. He is the only Religious Animal. He is the only animal that has the True Religion--several of them.” 
----
Mark Twain 
3—Emergent Values

The journey to find spiritual truth is again a first-hand experience, not just something to read about in ancient texts.

For the purposes of Dear Human, the term “woo woo” shall mean as follows: evangelizing a worldview where there is no boundary required between earnest mystical and metaphysical exploration, and loosely understood adages, clichés, and practices of a random assemblage of practices one has encountered. 

I am not woo woo. I don’t propose Emergents be automatically woo woo. You’re welcome if you’re woo woo. I’m not even one woo. I drive a pickup truck — with lifts! I will spend this weekend preparing for hunting season, setting cameras and fertilizing feed crops. Not to throw a skunk on your dinner table, but any notion you might get that I’m a Birkenstock wearing new age spirituality guy is about as right as expecting a bear to be vegetarian. If you met me in the city you might write me off as a dad bro, and in the country as another bubba. You won’t find a prayer bead or incense stick in this book. You won’t find a checklist or any Sanskrit, either. You will find a long and detailed bear huntin’ metaphor. That’s the kind of guy I am, and reflective of the real me. 

I believe we don’t understand our reality, and I believe there is a mystical dimension to the human experience. I am by no means alone in experiencing these mystical phenomena. A generation of leaders in technology and science have now used psychedelics to experience mystical phenomena themselves, and revered research institutions have recorded, researched, and published in journals documenting these experiences. 

We must accept the metaphysical consequence of this: humans can reliably occasion mystical experiences, basically on demand. That means the ancient religious practice of interpreting other people’s mystical experiences through writings and teachings is not the highest form of spiritual pursuit. Diving first hand into the mystical realm is. 

Emergent is old-school not new age.
I border on giggles when I read most “new age” spiritual texts. A congregation of people published a litany of texts—especially in Southern California, especially in the 80s and 90s—that offered new solutions for religion. These cut-from-raw-cloth solutions often synthesized Buddhist, Christian, and Neo-shamanic practices. Most of them were the equivalent of spiritual diet fads, and don’t deserve exploration. Some were more aligned with Scientology style thinking than ancient practices somehow suddenly rediscovered, perhaps the most common theme. 

Anybody claiming they have figured out spirituality, metaphysics, or religion cannot be an Emergent. To be an Emergent is to know our ignorance, rather to evangelize our certainty. 

But from that place of humility, we have the freedom to ask what matters in a new way. Not what mattered in the past that should still matter now, but instead: what is important today that will also be important as new understanding emerges? 

New age spiritualities built on “alternate metaphysical solutions” may actually be right. An Emergent holds this possibility in its place, and honors it when that is appropriate. But an Emergent does not believe that any person will one day magically derive the spiritual truths of the universe. 

There are very few ideas in the long history of humans grasping at understanding spiritual truth for which I have contempt and won’t consider. The one main one is stone-cold agnosticism. It’s a crack in the foundation of your intellectual integrity if you think you have enough data to declare that you know metaphysical truth. You don’t. We might live in a simulation. A religion might be true. Or truth may be emerging. 

(In Bayesian term, nerds, you don’t have the priors.)

You do you.

As this book progresses, we will focus increasingly on the idea of “spiritual alignment” — meaning that your actions and your beliefs are in sync. In the Japanese classic masterpiece “The Book of Five Rings” the author, Miyamoto Musashi describes the alignment of one’s sword, one’s tongue, and one’s philosophical mind. When the three act in harmony, life is good by samurai standards. I think of this all the time. In my case, it’s my mind, my body, and my beliefs. I try to keep them aligned. This book is a massive attempt at aligning my beliefs with my lifestyle. This way of living can be very difficult, but feels, well, aligned. Another way to think of this is that we all might be happier when we have very little cognitive dissonance between how we think we should live, and how we actually live day to day.

From the core concept of spiritual alignment, I think each person, family, and community of Emergents can define their values. That’s not up to me. 

But here’s what I’ll propose as starting points, written on a big (conceptual) whiteboard. 

Integrity—Behave in ways that make you proud to be accountable for your actions, and discuss them with other people.

Earnestness—Be real, and describe reality. Label stories as stories.

Alignment—Work to align yourself with the Universe as it emerges. Listen for The Addressable Unknown to provide further clues to the mysteries.

Emergence—Expect our values to change over time — to perpetually emerge. 

Build Tools to Help Others—The Technology Frontier is a form of Spiritual Discovery—Use the tools on the frontier of technology to pursue spiritual truth. Building aligned tools for spiritual discovery is a high calling. Use technology to predict outcomes, and ask if today’s perspective and plan will continue to address the first four values over time.

Connect with Nature—We are born of the Earth, and we should enjoy every bit of the miracle on which we live. As it turns out, sun exposure and vitamin D production are critical to our species, as is fresh air. Gratitude all the way down. 
͏
“Let us rise up and be thankful, for if we didn't learn a lot today, at least we learned a little, and if we didn't learn a little, at least we didn't get sick, and if we got sick, at least we didn't die; so, let us all be thankful.”
----
Zen Buddhist prayer 
4—Emergent as a Demographic

I’m proud to say I’m Emergent. I cringe at “agnostic,” even though, by any definition, Emergent thinking is agnostic by academic definitions.

Agnostic is a tarnished label. 

My many estimates, 25-30% of Americans are spiritual but not religious. The majority of those people believe in a Higher Power, and the majority pray — the majority of those pray daily! Yet, typically spiritual but not religious people are considered to be “none” or “nothing” by many demographic analysts and journalists. It’s nothing short of absurd to call people who believe in the divine and pray every day “nothing” in their beliefs. 

We will be stronger together as The Emergents.

Our goal is to make practiced, reverent agnosticism a peer of mainstream religions. Gratitude exercises as peers of communion services. Both reverent human actions, seeking meaning in that which the person doing the action cannot understand. 

The theory upon which the rest of this book is built is simple: it is time, right now, to start telling the spiritual truth as best we know it. There is a spiritual realm. It is addressable, and some people go there often — usually with psychedelics, but also meditation and storytelling. It is real in that humans share it, and can communicate with one another about their tourism into that space. We do not know what that is, nor where it is, nor how the uncanny consistencies across mystical experiences come to be. 

We also do not know if trees grow on other planets. Nor do we know if any other species has made a computer. 

We do not know if Jesus is God’s ambassador. We do not know if we live in a construction of Hindu Maya. For that matter, we do not know if live in a simulation.

So — where do we go from here?

To a new brand of agnosticism. One that provides honest spiritual lessons, addressing the addressable, and recognizing the unknown and unknowable. One that takes pride in every inch of progress on the million-mile path to spiritual truth. 


In short, we believe that 1) spiritual truth is emergent and will evolve and 2) humans have always worshiped the stars, which are, in a conceptual way, our most distant ancestors, and the gifts of the universe, like food and love.

How do we rebrand something that is nebulous and unknown? By finding the part of it that is fastidious and promoting it broadly and at high frequency. We have to find the brand promise and drive it home. The Emergents form communities with shared values, including a predominant focus on gratitude for the “miracle” of consciousness emerging from the stardust. 

The Emergent movement is tied to traditional practices explicitly. A compelling case exists that indigenous religions, in particular sun worship that was not deified, is strikingly similar. While personifying the Sun as Ra is not Emergent based on what we now know, revering the Sun as the source of life on Earth is very true in the most literal sense. Emergent families might hold a feast to show gratitude for the Sun, and in that way, honor contemporary scientific understanding and ancient religious beliefs at the same time. We don’t have to engage the preposterous to connect with the ancient. Surely, many of our ancestors spent their time thanking the soil, and the water, and the Sun. 

So two things will never change: the first is that truth, including spiritual truth, will continue to emerge — to evolve. The second is that humans have always done this type of worship, and always will. What is old is new again. 

That is an easy promise to make to the spiritual but not religious community. Those of us who identify as Emergent can explain at a cocktail party that we believe the miracle is the emergence of consciousness — and that’s good enough to “worship.” We believe that spiritual truth is emergent, and future generations will know more than we do, as we know more than our ancestors. And we know that humans have shown gratitude for the Earth, the Sun, and their community for as long as we can conceive history. 

We need t-shirts that say EMERGENT, so we can be proud of our identities in public.

We live in an era of rapid t-shirt printing, and low-cost design tools that can create an array of creative content in moments. New AI tools can render entire concepts with a few instructions. The Emergent movement stands to be the first spiritual movement developed in a way that is compatible with these tools, and can put them to use in earnest ways. From self-expression of young Emergents to ultra-low cost but interesting creative materials promoting events—even programming events—these tools enable to build and reinforce brands in the movement rapidly, with startup techniques to grow to reach as many spiritual but not religious people as would like to have a more formal infrastructure for their spiritual life. 

One of the biggest reformations in the history of Christianity came about because of a printing press. The Gutenberg Bible could be printed in relatively large volumes because of the novel printing press after which it was named. The press could distribute divine teachings at low cost in large numbers, taking the texts outside the secretive and powerful walls of courts, castles, and bishops. Once the people could read the text themselves, the power of priests diminished rapidly in many places. 

A generation ago, this book would be wild heresy, and dangerous to print. Today, I eagerly tell my Christian friends about it, and many express that they’re supportive of non-Christian people in their lives having a more formal spiritual identity and practice. It’s a beautiful turnabout. People who would have once been our enemies are instead our allies — while the cost to distributing information and promoting new lifestyles is as low as it's ever been. This year alone I will write this book, publish two apps supporting the Emergent movement, and have published about 100,000 words of independent writing about the technical side of software; all while starting a children’s book series with my kids, who do virtual school from home and do not have a nanny or regular babysitter, and launching a simple supporting clothing and merch line. I’ve done all of this thanks to one short-term freelance engineer, and a virtual editor. This is possible because new tools make it, so you can build new things in days and months, not years and decades. I’m not the exception, I’m the new normal.

Each piece of this movement requires someone to own it. I can only handle writing a few books, hosting some events, and building products that support the movement. That’s not enough to make a spiritual practice that’s a peer of organized religion. Not be a long shot. 

Beyond rebranding agnosticism as Emergent, we need to change the frames and memes in our heads. We are not the weak ones. We are not feebly uncertain. We have the spiritual strength to look at the situation before us and admit that we are a species just waking up from the space dust. We have only recently figured out the most basic rules of physics and computation, of the existence of other worlds seen only through microscopes and telescopes — and those of us brave enough to admit it need to be proud inside about our beliefs, not hiding from the torment of people whose uncertainty can make the dismissive, even aggressive about their beliefs. We are the ones who say that this existence is good enough to worship in its own right, and confident enough to proceed in life embracing the unknown. We are The Emergents. 
͏
“There was simply a marriage between a strand of psychological elements, which originated from quite specific moral religious roots, and capitalist opportunities for development.”
----
Max Weber 

[1]: “Modeling the Future of Religion in America” by The Pew Research Center. Published September 2022. 
